== Logistics ==

  * Dates: May 3-5, 2011 (Tuesday - Thursday)
  * Time: 9 am - 5 pm Eastern each day
  * Location: ORNL, Oak Ridge, TN

Audio, video, and screen conferencing is available via !WebEx -- see below for details.

== Details on location ==

 * The meeting will be held at [http://www.ornl.gov/ornlhome/visiting.shtml ORNL].
   * [http://www.ornl.gov/ornlhome/driving_directions.shtml Driving Directions]


== Hotels ==

 * [http://www.ornl.gov/ornlhome/hotels.shtml Oak Ridge Hotels]
 * There are other hotels in the Turkey !Creek/West Knoxville area that are also relatively close to the lab. ([http://maps.google.com/maps?f=q&source=s_q&hl=en&geocode=&q=Hotels+near+Turkey+Creek,+Knoxville,+TN&aq=0&sll=35.921613,-84.085966&sspn=0.028359,0.026565&gl=us&ie=UTF8&hq=Hotels&hnear=Turkey+Creek,+Knoxville,+Tennessee+37934&t=h&z=14 Google Map])


== Topics ==

Below are the agenda items that I have gathered so far (in no particular order):
 * MPI 2.2 implementation tickets
 * MPI 3.0 implementation planning
 * ORNL: Hierarchical Collectives discussion
 * Runtime integration discussion
 * New Process Affinity functionality
   * New user interface
   * Possibly implementation details
 * Update on ORTE development
   * State machine overview and discussion
 * Fault tolerance feature development and integration (C/R, logging, replication, FT-MPI, MPI 3.0, message reliability, ...)
   * Survey what is: (working, not working, not supported)
     * Available in the trunk
     * Available in a current release
     * In development
   * Update on the ''sensor'' framework
   * Create a FAQ entry for each supported FT technique, and how to use it
   * Is there anything we can share regarding code in development
 * Threading design discussion
   * Threading in the point-to-point stack (PML/BML/BTL/MPool)
   * Other threading problem areas (e.g., Attribute locking issue that emerged with ROMIO)
   * What level of MPI_THREAD_MULTIPLE do we want to (can we practically) support?
   * NUMA safety issues (e.g., write/read barriers)
   * George's work on threading in the TCP BTL
 * Testing infrastructure (MTT)
   * Discuss current setup, and state of testing
   * Review individual MTT setups
   * Discuss automated testing of command line/MCA options (coverage tracking)
 * MPI Extensions Update
 * ORTE Shared Memory Update

Additional topics that folks might want to discuss - Is there anyone that wants to include these and lead their discussions?:
 * Performance tuning (Point-to-point and/or Collective)


== Participants ==

 * Brian Barrett (Sandia)
 * Wesley Bland (UTK)
 * Shiqing Fan (HLRS)
 * Rich Graham (ORNL)
 * Samuel Gutierrez (LANL)
 * Nathan Hjelm (LANL)
 * Josh Hursey (ORNL)
 * Yevgeny Kliteynik (Mellanox)
 * Pavel (Pasha) Shamis (ORNL)
 * Jeff Squyres (Cisco)
 * Bin Wang (Auburn University)


== Agenda ==

Below is a ''sketch'' of the agenda. It will be finalized the week before the meeting, but is always subject to change.

 * '''Tuesday, May 3''' (''Building 5100 Room 262'')[[BR]]
    * Note: '''We will not be having the Open MPI Teleconference.'''
    * Webex password: ompi, https://cisco.webex.com/ciscosales/j.php?ED=163632252&UID=0&PW=NMDQxNzE2NjI5&RT=MiMxMQ%3D%3D

|| '''Start''' || '''End''' || '''Leader''' || '''Topic''' ||
|| 9:00 am ||  9:30 am || All || Logistics, etc ||
|| 9:30 am ||  Noon    || All || MPI 2.2 and 3.0 Implementation Tickets and Planning ||
|| Noon    ||  1:00 pm || '''-- Lunch --''' || ||
|| 1:00 pm ||  2:00 pm || ORNL || Hierarchical Collectives discussion ||
|| 2:00 pm ||  3:00 pm || !Oracle/Cisco/ORNL || New Process Affinity functionality ||
|| 3:00 pm ||  3:30 pm || '''-- Break --''' || ||
|| 3:30 pm ||  5:00 pm || ALL || Testing Infrastructure (MTT) ||

 * '''Wednesday, May 4''' (''Building 5100 Room 262'')
    * Webex password: ompi, https://cisco.webex.com/ciscosales/j.php?ED=163632262&UID=0&PW=NODhhMzZjZmUy&RT=MiMxMQ%3D%3D

|| '''Start''' || '''End''' || '''Leader''' || '''Topic''' ||
|| 9:00 am ||  Noon    || IBM/All || Threading Design ||
|| Noon    ||  1:00 pm || '''-- Lunch --''' || ||
|| 1:00 pm ||  2:00 pm || NVIDIA || CUDA Support ||
|| 2:00 pm ||  3:00 pm || Cisco || ORTE Development Update ||
|| 3:00 pm ||  3:30 pm || '''-- Break --''' || ||
|| 3:30 pm ||  5:00 pm || ORNL || Runtime integration discussion ||

 * '''Thursday, May 5''' (''Building 5700 Room L202'')
    * Webex password: ompi, https://cisco.webex.com/ciscosales/j.php?ED=163631762&UID=0&PW=NNjViYWMyMzA2&RT=MiMxMQ%3D%3D

|| '''Start''' || '''End''' || '''Leader''' || '''Topic''' ||
|| 9:00 am ||  Noon    || IBM/All || Threading Design (as needed) ||
|| 10:30 am || 11:00 am || ORNL/Cisco || MPI Extensions Update ||
|| Noon    ||  1:00 pm || '''-- Lunch --''' || ||
|| 1:00 pm ||  2:00 pm || LANL/Cisco/UTK || ORTE Shared Memory Update ||
|| 2:00 pm ||  3:00 pm || All || Wrap up and next steps discussion ||
|| 3:00 pm ||  3:30 pm || '''-- Break --''' || ||
|| 3:30 pm ||  5:00 pm || ORNL || Fault tolerance feature development and integration ||


== Results of Discussions ==

Tuesday:
 * '''MPI 2.2''' Report: {18}
   * ~~Need to create a custom report for both 2.2 and 3.0 pending tickets for quick reference.~~ (Done - Josh)
   * #1368: Projected to be less than a day of work. A summer student at ORNL might be available.
   * #2221: Algorithm addition for {{{MPI_IN_PLACE}}} in {{{MPI_Exscan}}}. !Rolf/Nvidia might have some cycles to look into this.
   * #2223: !Jeff/Cisco has it half integrated in a bitbucket branch. 1-2 weeks of work left for someone to finish it off.
   * #2699: George/UTK thinks it is ready. Jeff to follow-up.
 * '''MPI 3.0'''  {17}
   * #2715: Non-blocking collectives work ongoing at ORNL.
   * #2716: !Brian/Sandia to take a look at re-integration of the tmp branch. For 'ob1' it is just a bit of cleanup. But for 'cm' it may not be able to be implemented until the hardware catches up, so err_not_implemented will likely be returned.
   * Long term items that could be voted on this year.
     * New RMA: Needs progress thread support... !Brian/Sandia to lead this effort
     * Tools: !Jeff/Cisco to look into who might be interested in implementing (talk to HLRS)
     * Fault Tolerance: ORNL is leading the working group and the Open MPI prototype. More on this on Thursday.
     * Fortran: Craig/LANL is working on a prototype
     * MPI_Count: ??
     * Timers: !Jeff/Cisco to look into this if it passes.
     * MPI const: !Jeff/Cisco to look into this if it passes.
 * '''Hierarchical Collectives'''
   * Lots of good stuff presented from a couple of accepted and out-going papers. I'll leave the rest of the notes for those papers.
 * '''Affinity'''
   * Intention is to create a single, flexible mapper then build the common abstraction on top of it. This eases the maintainability burden on ompi developers.
   * The proposed algorithm is a bit complex.
   * Slides presented will be made available on demand.
   * Josh/ORNL, !Jeff/Cisco and !Terry/Oracle are working on writing this up at the moment.
   * Items to look at:
     * Ordering as a separate step.
     * Stride is useful in multithreaded application that does not allocate threads with respect to specific cache levels or hardware boundaries.
 * '''MTT Testing'''
   * Introduced a few new members to how to setup and run MTT
   * Not much outside of that was discussed regarding testing.

Wednesday:
 * '''TBD'''

Thursday:
 * '''TBD'''
